This is David Harvey and you're
listening to the Anti-Capitalist
Chronicles, a podcast that looks at
capitalism through a Marxist lens. This
podcast is made possible by Democracy at
Work. I want to talk about the topic of
freedom. This was raised last week when I
was giving some talks in Peru - of all
places - and the students there were very
interested in this issue: does
socialism require a surrender of
individual freedom? I think the right-wing
has managed in many
respects, particularly in the United
States but also in other parts of the
world, of somehow other colonizing the
notion of "freedom" and using the concept
of freedom as a weapon in class struggle.
To say that socialists are actually
about "unfreedom," that the slavery of a
socialist society or communist society
is something to be avoided and evaded at
all costs...I think that there is an
approach to this which we should take
great care so that we do not give up the
idea of individual freedom as being part
of what an emancipatory project of
socialist world is. In fact, we may want
to put it center instead of peripheral.
And put it center because I think
there's a way in which we can talk about
individual liberty and freedom as being
part of an emancipatory project which
rests upon a collective
attempt to build the kind of society
where all of us have life chances,
life possibilities which are open to us
all. Now Marx, on this had, I think, a
few interesting things to say. One of
them is that the realm of freedom begins
when the realm of necessity is left
behind. That freedom means nothing if you
have don't have enough to eat, if you are
denied access to adequate healthcare,
education; and the role of socialism is
to provide those basic necessities and
to fulfill those basic human needs so
that then people are free to do exactly
what they want. So you could in fact
argue that the end point of a socialist
transition - and even the end point of the
construction of a communist society - is
a world in which individual
capacities and powers are liberated
entirely from one's needs and
constraints. And that therefore, rather
than saying that the right-wing has a
monopoly over the notion of individual
freedom, that we should reclaim that idea
for socialism itself. But Marx also
pointed out that the idea of freedom is
always a double-edged sword.
And he has an interesting way of looking
at this, particularly when he looks at
the position of the laborer. He says the
laborer
in a capitalist society is free in the double sense. They are free in the sense
that they can offer their labor power to
whoever they want, they can offer it on
whatever conditions they wish and to put
forward, but at the same time they're
"unfree" because they have been freed from any control over the means of production.
In other words, they have to surrender
their labor power in order to live.
So you have a double-edge freedom, and Marx is very direct about looking at that.
In the chapter on "The Working Day" (Das Kapital, chapter 10), he puts it this way. That
the capitalist is free to say to the
labourer:
"I want to employ you at the lowest wage
possible for the largest number of hours
possible, that is what I would demand of
you" and the capitalist is free to do
that in a market society because, as we
know of market society, it's about
bidding about this, and bidding about
that. On the other hand Marx kind of says
the worker is free to say: "you don't have
a right for me to work, to make me work
12 hours a day. You don't have a right to
do these things." And Marx kind of
comments that given the nature of a
market society, both the capitalist and
the worker are right in terms of what
they demanding. But of course they demand
something radically different. So, says
Marx, they are both equally right by the
law of exchanges; but between equal
rights, force decides. That is, struggle
between capital and labor - not
necessarily violence, but could be
violent at a certain point. The struggle
between capital and labor is really what
is involved in the determination of how
long the worker must work for a day,
what the wage will be, and what the
conditions of labor will be like. Now,
this idea of freedom as a double-edged
sword is something that is, I think, very
very important to look at, and one of the
best analysts of this was an economic
historian called Karl Polanyi who wrote
a book called The Great Transformation.
Polanyi was not a Marxist - and I think
he read some Marx, but he didn't
subscribe as it were to the Marxist view
of things - but Polanyi himself was very
open about this question of rights and
question of freedom. This is what he
has to say in The Great Transformation: he
says that "there are good forms of
freedom and bad forms of freedom."
Among the bad forms of freedom that he
listed were "the freedom to exploit one's
fellows or the freedom to make
inordinate gains without commensal
service to the community. The freedom to
keep technological inventions from being
used for public benefit, or the freedom
to profit from public calamities, or
naturally induced calamities, some of
which are secretly engineered for
private advantage. But," Polanyi continues,
"the market economy under which these
freedoms throve also produced freedoms
we prize highly. Freedom of conscience, freedom of speech, freedom of meeting,
freedom of association, freedom to choose one's own job. While we may
cherish these freedoms for our own
sake" - and I think many of us still do, and
that would include me - "they were to a
large extent by-products of the same
economy that was also responsible for
the evil freedoms." And Polanyi's answer
to this duality makes some very strange reading given the current hegemony of
neoliberal thinking, and the way in which
freedom is presented to us by political power.
He writes about it this
way: "the passing of the market economy"
- that is getting beyond the market
economy - "can become the beginning
of an era of unprecedented freedom." Now
that's a pretty shocking statement, to
kind of say that the real freedom begins after we leave the market economy behind.
So it continues: "juridical
and actual freedom could be made more
wider and more general than ever before.
Regulation and control can achieve
freedom not only for the few, but for all.
Freedom not as an appurtenant of
privilege, tainted at the source, but as a
prescriptive right extending far beyond
the narrow confines of the political
sphere into the intimate organization of
society itself. Thus will old freedoms
and civic rights be added to the fund of
new freedoms generated by the leisure
and security that industrial society
offers to all. Such a society can afford
to be both just and free."
Now, that idea of a society based upon justice and freedom, justice and liberty,
seems to me to be of
being the political agenda of much of,
say, the student movement of the
60s to the 68 generation.
That there was a demand for both justice
and freedom. Freedom from coercion of the
state, freedom from coercion imposed by
corporate capital, but also justice.
It was interesting that in the 1970s, in
effect, politics was about working
through that demand and in effect saying:
"we give you the freedom," said the
capitalist class, "but you forget the
justice." And I think giving the freedom
was also circumscribed, in the sense that
the freedom was going to be given by
freedom of the market. And that therefore,
the free market was the answer to the
question of freedom, and just forget the
justice, because justice would be a
product of demand and supply in the
market. And this was something that
Polanyi also recognized.
Unfortunately, he said: "The passage to the
future," that he outlined here, "is blocked
by a moral obstacle." And the moral
obstacle was something which he called
"liberal utopianism." I think we
still face that liberal utopianism.
It's an ideology which is pervasive in
the media, and it's an ideology that is
pervasive in politics, and the liberal
utopianism of, say, the Democratic Party
is one of the things that stands in the
way of the achievement of real freedom.
So what Polyani did is to say that that
kind of approach to freedom is something
that is going to get in the way.
And I quote him: "Planning and control are
being attacked as a denial of freedom.
Free enterprise and private ownership
are declared to be the essentials of
freedom." And this of course was what the
main ideologists of neoliberalism put forward.
This is what Milton Friedman was about.
This is what Hayek insisted. That the
freedom of the individual from state
domination can only be assured, he said,
in a society which is founded on private
property rights and individual liberty.
"Planning and control then are attacked
as a denial of freedom. Private ownership
is declared to be the essential of
freedom. No society built on other
foundations is said to deserve to be
called 'free.' The freedom that regulation
creates is denounced as 'unfreedom.' The
justice, liberty and welfare it offers
are decried as a camouflage of slavery."
Now to me, this is one of the key issues
of our time. That are we going to go
beyond the freedoms which are limited
freedoms of the market, and market
determinations, and the laws of supply
and demand, and what Marx called "the laws of motion of capital"...
Are we going to be able to go beyond that? Or are we going
to accept, as Margaret Thatcher put it,
that "there is no alternative"?
And of course, if there is no alternative, there is no freedom. And this is the
paradox of our current situation. That in
the name of freedom
we've actually adopted a liberal utopian
ideology which is a barrier to the
achievement of real freedom. Because I do
not think it is a world of freedom when
somebody who wants to get an education
has to pay an immense amount of money
for it and has student debt
stretching way, way into their future.
What we're talking about is debt peonage.
What we're talking about is debt slavery.
And this is something which
needs to be avoided and needs to be
circumscribed. We should have free
education; there should be no charge for
that. The same should be true of health
care, and the same should be true of
basic provision of housing. And now it's
interesting that we went from a world in
the 1960s, where there was social
provision of housing.
In Britain for example, a large
proportion of the housing provision in
the 1960s came in the public sector: it
was social housing. And when I was
growing up, that social housing was the
basic provision of a necessity at a
reasonably low cost. Then what happened
was Margaret Thatcher came along and
privatized it all, and said, basically, "you
will be much freer if you own your
property and you can be actually become
part of a property-owning democracy."
And so instead of 60% of the housing being
in the public sector we suddenly go to a
situation where only about 20 - or maybe
even less - percent of the housing is in
the public sector. And of course, one of
the things that then happens is that
housing becomes a commodity, and
commodity then becomes a part
of speculative activity. And to the
degree it becomes a vehicle of
speculation, so the price of the property
goes up. And so you get a rising cost of
housing with no actual increase in
indirect provision. So you take an issue
like housing and you kind of say...I've
actually lived in my lifetime through
the following sequence: when I was a kid
growing up I was brought up in what
might be called a respectable
working-class community where there was
home ownership.
Now, most people in the working-class did
not have homeownership, but there was a
segment of the working class that had
home ownership, and I happened to be
raised in a community of that kind.
But the house was viewed as a "use-value." That is, it was a place where we
lived and we did things and, yeah, it was
family life and all those kinds of
things. We never really discussed "exchange value." And in fact I saw some
data recently that said that housing
values - particularly housing values for
working-class housing - really showed
absolutely no shift at all over
100 years or more up until the 1960s.
And then in the 1960s something else
began to happen. Housing started to be
viewed as an exchange value rather than
a use-value. People started to think of
how valuable is this: can we improve its
value? If so, how do we improve its value?
So suddenly exchange value
considerations came in and then along
came Margaret Thatcher and said "okay,
we're going to privatize all of the
social housing so everybody can start to
benefit from rising exchange values."
So the question of housing as an
exchange value started to become
significant. Now, one of the consequences
of this is that those people in the
lowest elements of the population, from
the standpoint of income, found it harder
and harder and harder to find a place to live.
So that instead of living in very
central locations where they had easy
access to job and employment
opportunities, they were more and more
expelled from the centres of cities and
from the best locations and increasingly had
to commute longer and longer distances
to their work and to their jobs.
Now, by the time you get to the 1990s
however, the house has become an
instrument of speculative gain, that
people start to speculate on
housing values, and we get speculative
activity in housing markets. And the
result is that many of the people in the
lowest levels of the population cannot
find a place to live: we get the
production of homelessness. Now, when I
was young, there were some homeless
people around but very, very, very few.
But now, if you're in London, or you're in
large cities of that kind, you find more
and more homeless people. In New York
City right now, the data suggests that we
have 60,000 homeless people. We have a
large proportion of young kids who are
actually homeless - not in the sense
that you see them on the streets, but
they sort of shift from one
relative to another, or one friend to
another, and sleep on the couch, and this
kind of thing. I mean, this is no way to
actually create solidarious communities.
So what do we see in cities? We see
actually a great deal of building going on.
But it's speculative building. We're actually building cities for people to speculate in.
And not cities for for people to live in.
And if we create cities for investment purposes rather than for for living purposes we
get the kind of situation we see in New
York City, where there is a crisis of
affordable housing. The mass of the
population is badly served in terms of
its use-values of housing. It has very
little access to adequate use-values.
At the same time we are building large, huge, sort of high-value apartments for the ultra-rich.
The former mayor of New York
City had a kind of ambition that every
billionaire in the world would come and actually invest and live
and have a big apartment on Park
Avenue, or somewhere like that, and of
course that indeed is what happened. So
we find you know, Arab sheiks and
billionaires from India or China or Russia, but they
don't live! They just come here maybe
once or twice a year, and that's it.
This is no foundation for decent
living arrangements. And so on the one side,
we are building cities and building
housing in a way which provides
tremendous freedom for the upper classes,
at the same time as it actually produces
unfreedom for the rest of the population.
And this is what I think is meant when
Marx make that kind of
famous comment: that the realm of
necessity actually has to be overcome in order for the realm of freedom to be achieved.
What we have right now in
New York City is freedom of
investment, freedom for the upper classes
to choose where it is that they will
live, and the mass of the population is
then left with almost no choice whatsoever.
And this is, if you like, the
way in which market freedoms limit possibilities.
From that standpoint I
think that the socialist perspective is
to do as Polanyi suggests. That is, we
collectivize the question of access
to freedom, access to housing. We turn it
away from being something which is
something surely and simply in
the market to being something in the
public domain. Now, this I think is one of
the basic ideas of socialism in the
contemporary system: to put things in the
public domain. And I think that, on this, I
get some encouragement from the fact
that the Labour Party in Britain - which
is one of the few traditional parties
which seems to have some vigorous
Democratic urgency about what it is up
to - starts to propose that many areas in
in public life should be taken back from
the market and brought back into the
public domain. For example, transportation. Now, if you say to anybody in Britain
that private provision of transportation
on the railways is producing a more
efficient transport system, everybody in
Britain will laugh at you. They know
perfectly well what the consequences of
privatization have been about. It's been
a disaster, it's been a mess, it's been
uncoordinated, and the same thing applies
to public transportation in cities. We
also see the privatization of water
supply - which is supposed to be good - but
on the other hand, what we find is of
course that water is charged for us a
basic necessity. It should not be
rendered through the market but now, you have to pay your water rate,
and water provision has not been
good. So the Labour Party is kind of
saying: "look, there of all these areas
which are basic necessities for the
population and they should not be
provided through the market. So we're
going to stop this business of student
loans, we're going to stop our
access to education through
privatization, we're going to actually
move much more to this
world of something being provided: basic
necessities through the public domain."
That there is an urge to try to
say: let's take these basic necessities
and take them out of the market. Let's
provide them in a different way, and we
could do that with education. We can do
that with health care. We can do that
with housing, and we should do it with
basic food supplies. In fact there have
been experiments
in some Latin American countries with
providing basic food supplies to
lower populations at a cut price. I
don't see any reason whatsoever why we
shouldn't have a basic food supply
configuration for most people in the
world today.
Now this then is the idea that the realm
of freedom is only possible when we have
actually provided all of the basic
necessities which we will need to lead
for a decent adequate life. And that, it
seems to me, is the idea of freedom which
a socialist society would pursue and
which would say that there is a
collective way in which to do this.
Finally, one point: it is often said that
in order to do this we have to surrender
our individuality, and we have to give up
something. Well, to some degree, yes, that
might be true. But there is a greater
freedom to be achieved. I think that
I read Marx as saying he is actually
interested in maximizing the realm of
individual freedom, but that individual
freedom can only be maximized when the
realm of necessity is taken care of. And
the task of a socialist society is not
to regulate everything that goes on in
society, not at all. The task of a
socialist society is to make sure that
all of the basic necessities are taking
care of - freely provided - so that people
can then do exactly what they want.
And here I think it's not only that they
receive the resources to do it, but they
also have the time to do it. Freedom - free
time, real free time - is something which
is absolutely crucial to the idea of a socialist society.
And I think if you ask everybody
right now: how much free time do you have?
You find actually everybody kind of says:
"I have almost no free time, whatsoever.
It's all taken up with this, that and
everything else." But then real freedom is
a world in which we have free time to do
whatever we want. And I think that that
emancepatrian message about freedom
is crucial to the idea of a socialist society
and it's something that we can
all work towards. Thank you for joining
me today you've been listening to David
Harvey's Anti-Capitalist Chronicles, a
Democracy at Work production. A special thank you to the wonderful Patreon community for supporting this project.